---
layout: page
title: User Classification
parent: Analyses
---

The ORCA database offers comprehensive information on transit transactions, presenting an opportunity to analyze how users utilize transit services. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, transit usage was more predictable, particularly for employees with 9-5 jobs. However, the shift to remote work and hybrid work models post-COVID has introduced more variability in transit usage patterns. Essential workers, on the other hand, have continued to rely heavily on transit services throughout the pandemic. Transit agencies have adapted their services based on these changing patterns.

The questions we aim to address are:

1. What are the typical types of transit users in the ORCA database?
2. Do certain user groups experience better or worse transit services compared to others?

**Data**

We are utilizing the ORCA boarding data to analyze transit usage. Summary statistics of user transactions (excluding transfers) are calculated and grouped by different times of the day. Users are then classified based on their temporal patterns; for instance, a typical 9-5 commuter might have the highest frequency of boardings in the morning and afternoon, with occasional evening boardings.

**Tools (aka “component specification”)**

The primary tools used are Python and PostgreSQL. The key packages leveraged are pandas and SQLAlchemy.

**Processes**

We initially implemented the code using SQLAlchemy. Given the large volume of data, we refined the raw SQL generated by SQLAlchemy to optimize performance and generate results directly in SQL.


**Analyses**

What approaches did you try that didn’t work?
What analyses did you end up sticking with?

**Limitations**

What are the shortcomings of your approach?
How can your work be improved?

